Death of a Familiar
When I learnt from a mutual acquaintance that my friend Sunil had been killed, I could not help feeling
a little surprised, even shocked. Had Sunil killed somebody, it would not have surprised me in the
least; he did not greatly value the lives of others. But for him to have been the victim was a sad
reflection of his rapid decline.
He was twenty-one at the time of his death. Two friends of his had killed him, stabbing him several
times with their knives. Their motive was said to have been revenge: apparently he had seduced their
wives. They had invited him to a bar in Meerut, had plied him with country liquor, and had then
accompanied him out into the cold air of a December night. It was drizzling a little. Near the bridge
over the canal, one of his companions seized him from behind, while the other plunged a knife first
into his stomach and then into his chest. When Sunil slumped forward, the other friend stabbed him in
the back. A passing cyclist saw the little group, heard a cry and a groan, saw a blade flash in the light
from his lamp. He pedalled furiously into town, burst into the kotwali, and roused the sergeant on
duty. Accompanied by two constables, they ran to the bridge but found the area deserted. It was only
as the rising sun drew an open wound across the sky that they found Sunil’s body on the canal-bank,
his head and shoulders on the sand, his legs in running water.
The bar-keeper was able to describe Sunil’s companions, and they were arrested that same
morning in their homes. They had not found time to get rid of their blood-soaked clothes. As they
were not known to me, I took very little interest in the proceedings against them; but I understand that
they have appealed against their sentences of life imprisonment.
I was in Delhi at the time of the murder, and it was almost a year since I had last seen Sunil. We
had both lived in Shahganj and had left the place for jobs; I to work in a newspaper office, he in a
paper factory owned by an uncle. It had been hoped that he would in time acquire a sense of
responsibility and some stability of character; but I had known Sunil for over two years, and in that
time it had been made abundantly clear that he had not been torn to fit in with the conventions. And as
for character, his had the stability of a grasshopper. He was forever in search of new adventures and
sensations, and this appetite of his for every novelty led him into some awkward situations.
He was a product of Partition, of the frontier provinces, of Anglo-Indian public schools, of films
Indian and American, of medieval India, knights in armour, hippies, drugs, sex-magazines and the
subtropical Terai. Had he lived in the time of the Moghuls, he might have governed a province with
saturnine and spectacular success. Being born into the 20th century, he was but a juvenile delinquent.
It must be said to his credit that he was a delinquent of charm and originality. I realised this when I
first saw him, sitting on the wall of the football stadium, his long legs — looking even longer and
thinner because of the tight trousers he wore —dangling over the wall, his chappals trailing in the
dust of the road, while his white bush-shirt lay open, unbuttoned, showing his smooth brown chest. He
had a smile on his long face, which, with its high cheekbones, gave his cheeks a cavernous look, an
impression of unrequited hunger.
We were both watching the wrestling. Two practice bouts were in progress — one between two
thin, undernourished boys, and the other between the master of the akhara and a bearded Sikh who
drove trucks for a living. They struggled in the soft mud of the wrestling pit, their well-oiled bodies
glistening in the sunlight that filtered through a massive banyan tree. I had been standing near the
akhara for a few minutes when I became conscious of the young man’s gaze. When I turned round to
look at him, he smiled satanically.
‘Are you a wrestler, too?’ he asked.
‘Do I look like one?’ I countered.
‘No, you look more like an athlete’ he said. ‘I mean a long-distance runner. Very thin.’
‘I’m a writer. Like long-distance runners, most writers are very thin.’
‘You’re an Anglo-Indian, aren’t you?’
‘My family history is very complicated, otherwise I’d be delighted to give you all the details.’
‘You could pass for a European, you know. You’re quite fair. But you have an Indian accent.’
‘An Indian accent is very similar to a Welsh accent,’ I observed. ‘I might pass for Welsh, but not
many people in India have met Welshmen!’
He chuckled at my answer; then stared at me speculatively. ‘I say,’ he said at length, as though an
idea of great weight and importance had occurred to him. ‘Do you have any magazines with pictures
of dames?’
‘Well, I may have some old Playboys. You can have them if you like.’
‘Thanks,’ he said, getting down from the wall. ‘I’ll come and fetch them. This wrestling is boring,
anyway.’
He slipped his hand into mine (a custom of no special significance), and began whistling snatches
of Hindi film tunes and the latest American hits.
I was living at the time in a small flat above the town’s main shopping centre. Below me there
were shops, restaurants and a cinema. Behind the building lay a junkyard littered with the framework
of vintage cars and broken-down tongas. I was paying thirty rupees a month for my two rooms, and
sixty to the Punjabi restaurant where I took my meals. My earnings as a freelance writer were
something like a hundred and fifty rupees a month, sufficient to enable me to make both ends meet,
provided I remained in the back-water, that was Shahganj.
Sunil (I had learnt his name during our walk from the stadium), made himself at home in my flat as
soon as he entered it. He went through all my magazines, books and photographs with the
thoroughness of an executor of a will. In India, it is customary for people to try and find out all there
is to know about you, and Sunil went through the formalities with considerable thoroughness. While
he spoke, his roving eyes made a mental inventory of all my belongings. These were few — a
typewriter, a small radio, and a cupboard-full of books and clothes, besides the furniture that went
with the flat. I had no valuables. Was he disappointed? I could not be sure. He wore good clothes and
spoke fluent English, but good clothes and good English are no criterion of honesty. He was a little
too glib to inspire confidence. Apparently, he was still at college. His father owned a cloth shop; a
strict man who did not give his son much spending money.
But Sunil was not seriously interested in money, as I was shortly to discover. He was interested in
experience, and searched for it in various directions.
‘You have a nice view,’ he said, leaning over my balcony and looking up and down the street. ‘You
can see everyone on parade. Girls! They’re becoming quite modern now. Short hair and small
blouses. Tight salwars. Maxis, minis. Falsies. Do you like girls?’
‘Well …’ I began, but he did not really expect an answer to his question.
‘What are little girls made of? That’s an English poem, isn’t it?’ ‘Sugar, and spice and everything
nice …,’ ‘and I don’t remember the rest.’ He lowered his voice to a confidential undertone. ‘Have
you had any girls?’
‘Well …’
‘I had fun with a girl, you know, my cousin. She came to stay with us last summer. Then there’s a
girl in college who’s stuck on me. But this is such a backward country. We can’t be seen together in
public, and I can’t invite her to my house. Can I bring her here some day?’
‘Well, I don’t know …’ I hadn’t lived in a small town like Shahganj for some time, and wasn’t sure
if morals had changed along with the fashions.
‘Oh, not now,’ he said. ‘There’s no hurry. I’ll give you plenty of warning, don’t worry.’ He put an
arm around my shoulders and looked at me with undisguised affection. ‘We are going to be great
friends, you and I.’
After that I began to receive almost daily visits from Sunil. His college classes gave over at three
in the afternoon, and though it was seldom that he attended them, he would stop at my place after
putting in a brief appearance at the study hall. I could hardly blame him for neglecting his books:
Shakespeare and Chaucer were prescribed for students who had but a rudimentary knowledge of
Modern English usage. Vast numbers of graduates were produced every year, and most of them
became clerks or bus-conductors or, perhaps, school-teachers. But Sunil’s father wanted the best for
his son. And in Shahganj that meant as many degrees as possible.
Sunil would come stamping into my rooms, waking me from the siesta which had become a habit
during summer afternoons. When he found that I did not relish being woken up, he would leave me to
sleep while he took a bath under the tap. After making liberal use of my hair-cream and after-shave
lotion (he had just begun shaving, but used the lotion on his body), he would want to go to a picture or
restaurant, and would sprinkle me with cold water so that I leapt off the bed.
One afternoon he felt more than usually ebullient, and poured a whole bucket of water over me,
soaking the sheets and mattress. I retaliated by flinging the water-jug at his head. It missed him and
shattered itself against the wall. Sunil then went berserk and started splashing water all over the
room, while I threatened and shouted. When I tried restraining him by force, we rolled over on the
ground, and I banged my head against the bedstead and almost lost consciousness. He was then full of
contrition, and massaged the lump on my head with hair-cream and refused to borrow any money from
me that day.
Sunil’s ‘borrowing’ consisted of extracting a few rupee-notes from my wallet, saying he needed the
money for books or a tailor’s bill or a shopkeeper who was threatening him with violence, and then
spending it on something quite different. Before long I gave up asking him to return anything, just as I
had given up asking him to stop seeing me.
Sunil was one of those people best loved from a distance. He was born with a special talent for
trouble. I think it pleased his vanity when he was pursued by irate creditors, shopkeepers, brothers
whose sisters he had insulted, and husbands whose wives he had molested. My association with him
did nothing to improve my own reputation of Shahganj.
My landlady, a protective, motherly, Punjabi widow, said: ‘Son, you are in bad company. Do you
know that Sunil has already been expelled from one school for stealing, and from another for sexual
offences?’
‘He’s only a boy,’ I said. ‘And he’s taking longer than most boys to grow up. He doesn’t realise the
seriousness of what he does. He will learn as he grows older.’
‘If he grows older,’said my landlady darkly. ‘Do you know that he nearly killed a man last year?
When a fruit-seller who had been cheated threatened to report Sunil to the police, he threw a brick at
the man’s head. The poor man was in hospital for three weeks. If Sunil’s father did not have political
influence, the boy would be in jail now, instead of climbing your stairs every afternoon.’
Once again I suggested to Sunil that he come to see me less often.
He looked hurt and offended.
‘Don’t you like me any more?’
‘I like you immensely. But I have work to do …’
‘I know. You think I am a crook. Well, I am a crook.’ He spoke with all the confidence of a young
man who has never been hurt or disillusioned; he had romantic notions about swindlers and gangsters.
‘I’ll be a big crook one day, and people will be scared of me. But don’t worry, old boy, you’re my
friend. I wouldn’t harm you in any way. In fact, I’ll protect you.’
‘Thank you, but I don’t require protection, I want to be left alone. I have work, and you are a worry
and a distraction.’
‘Well, I’m not going to leave you alone,’ he said, assuming the posture of a spoilt child. ‘Why
should you be left alone? Who do you think you are? If we’re friends now, it’s your fault. I’m not
going to buzz off just to suit your convenience.’
‘Come less often, that’s all.’
‘I’ll come more often, you old snob! I know, you’re thinking of your reputation — as if you had any.
Well, you don’t have to worry, mon ami — as they say in Hollywood. I’ll be very discreet, daddyji!’
Whenever I complained or became querulous, Sunil would call me daddy or uncle or sometimes
mum, and make me feel more ridiculous. If he was in a good mood, he would use the Hindi word
chacha (uncle). All it did was to make me feel much older than my twenty-five years.
Sunil turned up one afternoon with blood streaming from his nose and from a gash across his
forehead. He sat down at the foot of the bed, and began dabbling his face with the bedsheet.
‘What have you done to yourself?’ I asked in some alarm.
‘Some fellows beat me up. There were three of them. They followed me on their cycles.’
‘Who were they?’ I asked, looking for iodine on the dressing-table.
‘Just some fellows …’
‘They must have had a reason.’
‘Well, a sister of one of them had been talking to me.’
‘Well, that isn’t a reason, even in Shahganj. You must have said or done something to offend her.’
‘No, she likes me,’ he said, wincing as I dabbed iodine on his forehead ‘We went to the guava
orchard near my uncle’s farm.’
‘She went out there alone with you?’
‘Sure. I took her on my bike. They must have followed us. Anyway, we weren’t doing much except
kissing and fooling around. But some people seem to think that’s worse than …’
Both he and the other boys of Shahganj had grown up to look upon girls as strange, exotic animals,
who must be seized at the first opportunity. Experimenting in sex was like playing a surreptitious
game of marbles.
Sunil produced a clasp-knife from his pocket, opened it, and held the blade against the flat of his
hand.
‘Don’t worry, uncle, I can look after myself. The next fellow who tries to interfere with me will get
this in his guts.’
‘Don’t be silly,’ I said. ‘You will go to prison for ten years. Listen, I’m going up to Simla for a
couple of weeks, just for a change. Why don’t you come with me? It will be a pleasant change from
Shahganj, and in the meantime all this fuss will die down.’
It was one of those invitations which I make so readily and instantly regret. As soon as I had made
the suggestion, I realised that Sunil in Simla might be even more of a problem than Sunil in Shahganj.
But it was too late for me to back out.
‘Simla! Why not? The college is closing for the summer holidays, and my father won’t mind my
going with you. He believes you’re the only respectable friend I’ve got. Boy! we’ll have a good time
in Simla.’
‘You’ll have to behave yourself there, if you want to come with me. No girls, Sunil.’
‘No girls, sir. I’ll be very good, chachaji. Please take me to Simla.’
‘I think two hundred rupees should be enough for a fortnight for both of us,’ I said.
‘Oh, too much,’said Sunil modestly.
And a week later we were actually in Simla, putting up at a moderately priced, middle-class hotel.
Our first few days in the hill-station were pleasant enough. We went for long walks, tired ourselves
out, and acquired enormous appetites. Sunil, in the hills for the first time in his life, declared that they
were wonderful, and thanked me a score of times for bringing him up. He took a genuine interest in
exploring remote valleys, forests and waterfalls, and seemed to be losing some of his selfcentredness. I believe that mountains do affect one’s personality, if one can remain among them long
enough; and if Sunil had grown up in the hills instead of in a refugee township, I have no doubt he
would have been a completely different person.
There was one small waterfall I rather liked. It was down a ravine, in a rather inaccessible spot,
where very few people ever went. The water fell about thirty feet into a small pool. We bathed here
on two occasions, and Sunil quite forgot the attractions of the town. And we would have visited the
spot again had I not slipped and sprained my ankle. This accident confined me to the hotel balcony for
several days, and I was afraid that Sunil, for want of companionship, would go in search of more
mundane distractions. But though he went out often enough, he came back dusty and sunburnt; and the
fact that he asked me for very little money was evidence enough of his fondness for the outdoors.
Striding through forests of oak and pine, with all the world stretched out far below, was no doubt a
new and exhilarating experience for him. But how long would it be before the spell was broken?
‘Don’t you need any money?’ I asked him uneasily, on the third day of his Thoreau-like activities.
‘What for, uncle? Fresh air costs nothing. And besides, I don’t owe money to anyone in Simla. We
haven’t been here long enough.’
‘Then perhaps we should be going,’ I said.
‘Shahganj is a miserable little dump.’
‘I know, but it’s your home. And for the time being, it’s mine.’
‘Listen, uncle,’ he said, after a moment of reflection. ‘Yesterday, on one of my walks, I met a
school-teacher. She’s over thirty, so don’t get nervous. She doesn’t have any brothers or relatives
who will come chasing after me. And she’s much fairer than you, uncle. Is it all right if I’m friendly
with her?’
‘I suppose so,’ I said uncertainly. School teachers can usually take care of themselves (if they want
to), and, besides, an older woman might have had a sobering influence on Sunil.
He brought her over to see me that same evening, and seemed quite proud of his new acquisition.
She was indeed fair, perhaps insipidly so, with blonde hair and light blue eyes. She had a young face
and a healthy body, but her voice was peculiarly toneless and flat, giving an impression of boredom,
of lassitude. I wondered what she found attractive in Sunil apart from his obvious animal charm. They
had hardly anything in common; but perhaps the absence of similar interests was an attraction in itself.
In six or seven years of teaching Maureen must have been tired of the usual scholastic types. Sunil
was refreshingly free from all classroom associations.
Maureen let her hair down at the first opportunity. She switched on the bedroom radio and found
Ceylon. Soon she was teaching Sunil to dance. This was amusing, because Sunil, with his long legs,
had great difficulty in taking small steps; nor could Maureen cope with his great strides. But he was
very earnest about it all, and inserting an unlighted cigarette between his lips, did his best to move
rhythmically around the bedroom. I think he was convinced that by learning to dance he would reach
the high-water mark of western culture. Maureen stood for all that was remote and romantic, and for
all the films that he had seen. To conquer her would, for Sunil, be a voyage of discovery, not a mere
gratification of his senses. And for Maureen, this new unconventional friendship must have been a
refreshing diversion from the dreariness of her school routine. She was old enough to realise that it
was only a diversion. The intensity of emotional attachments had faded with her early youth, and love
could wound her heart no more. But for Sunil, it was only the beginning of something that stirred him
deeply, moved him inexorably towards manhood.
It was unfortunate that I did not then notice this subtle change in my friend. I had known him only as
a shallow creature, and was certain that this new infatuation would disappear as soon as the novelty
of it wore off. As Maureen had no encumbrances, no relations that she would speak of, I saw no harm
in encouraging the friendship and seeing how it would develop.
‘I think we’d better have something to drink,’ I said, and ringing the bell for the room-bearer,
ordered several bottles of beer.
Sunil gave me an odd, whimsical look. I had never before encouraged him to drink. But he did not
hesitate to open the bottles; and, before long, Maureen and he were drinking from the same glass.
‘Let’s make love,’said Sunil, putting his arm round Maureen’s shoulders and gazing adoringly into
her dreamy blue eyes.
They seemed unconcerned by my presence; but I was embarrassed, and getting up, said I would be
going for a walk.
‘Enjoy yourself,’said Sunil, winking at me over Maureen’s shoulder.
‘You ought to get yourself a girl friend,’said the young woman in a conciliatory tone.
‘True,’ I said, and moved guiltily out of the room I was paying for.
Our stay in Simla lasted several days longer than we had planned. I saw little of Sunil and Maureen
during this time. As Sunil had no desire to return to Shahganj any earlier than was absolutely
necessary, he avoided me during the day; but I managed to stay awake late enough one night to
confront him when he crept quietly into the room.
‘Dear friend and familiar,’ I said. ‘I hate to spoil your beautiful romance, but I have absolutely no
money left, and unless you have resources of your own — or if Maureen can support you — I suggest
that you accompany me back to Shahganj the day after tomorrow.’
‘How mean you are, chachaji. This is something serious. I mean Maureen and me. Do you think we
should get married?’
‘No.’
‘But why not?’
‘Because she cannot support you on a teacher’s salary. And she probably isn’t interested in a
permanent relationship — like ours.’
‘Very funny. And you think I’d let my wife slave for me?’
‘I do. And besides …’
‘And besides,’ he interrupted, grinning, ‘she’s old enough to be my mother.’
‘Are you really in love with her?’ I asked him. ‘I’ve never known you to be serious about
anything.’
‘Honestly, uncle.’
‘And what about her?’
‘Oh, she loves me terribly, really she does. She’s ready to come down with us if it’s possible. Only
I’ve told her that I’ll first have to break the news to my father, otherwise he might kick me out of the
house.’
‘Well, then,’ I said shrewdly, ‘the sooner we return to Shahganj and get your father’s blessings, the
sooner you and Maureen can get married, if that’s what both of you really want.’
Early next morning Sunil disappeared, and I knew he would be gone all day. My foot was better,
and I decided to take a walk on my own to the waterfall I had liked so much. It was almost noon when
I reached the spot and began descending the steep path to the ravine. The stream was hidden by dense
foliage, giant ferns and dahlias, but the water made a tremendous noise as it tumbled over the rocks.
When I reached a sharp promontory, I was able to look down on the pool. Two people were lying on
the grass.
I did not recognise them at first. They looked very beautiful together, and I had not expected Sunil
and Maureen to look so beautiful. Sunil, on whom no surplus flesh had as yet gathered, possessed all
the sinuous grace and power of a young God; and the woman, her white flesh pressed against young
grass, reminded me of a painting by Titian that I had seen in a gallery in Florence. Her full, mature
body was touched with a tranquil intoxication, her breasts rose and fell slowly, and waves of muscle
merged into the shadows of her broad thighs. It was as though I had stumbled into another age, and
had found two lovers in a forest glade. Only a fool would have wished to disturb them. Sunil had for
once in his life risen above mediocrity, and I hurried away before the magic was lost.
The human voice often shatters the beauty of the most tender passions; and when we left Simla next
day, and Maureen and Sunil used all the stock cliches to express their love, I was a little
disappointed. But the poetry of life was in their bodies, not in their tongues.
Back in Shahganj, Sunil actually plucked up courage to speak to his father. This, to me, was a sign
that he took the affair very seriously, for he seldom approached his father for anything. But all the
sympathy that he received was a box on the ears. I received a curt note suggesting that I was having a
corrupting influence on the boy and that I should stop seeing him. There was little I could do in the
matter, because it had always been Sunil who had insisted on seeing me.
He continued to visit me, bring me Maureen’s letters (strange, how lovers cannot bear that the
world should not know their love), and his own to her, so that I could correct his English!
It was at about this time that Sunil began speaking to me about his uncle’s paper factory, and the
possibility of working in it. Once he was getting a salary, he pointed out, Maureen would be able to
leave her job and join him.
Unfortunately Sunil’s decision to join the paper factory took months to crystallise into a definite
course of action, and in the meantime he was finding a panacea for love-sickness in rum and
sometimes cheap country spirits. The money that he now borrowed was used not to pay his debts, or
to incur new ones, but to drink himself silly. I regretted having been the first person to have offered
him a drink: I should have known that Sunil was a person who could do nothing in moderation.
He pestered me less often now, but the purpose of his occasional visits became all too obvious. I
was having a little success, and thoughtlessly gave Sunil the few rupees he usually demanded. At the
same time I was beginning to find other friends, and I no longer found myself worrying about Sunil, as
I had so often done in the past. Perhaps this was treachery on my part …
When finally I decided to leave Shahganj for Delhi. I went in search of Sunil to say goodbye. I
found him in a small bar, alone at a table with a bottle of rum. Though barely twenty, he no longer
looked a boy. He was a completely different person from the handsome, cocksure youth I had met at
the wrestling-pit a year previously. His cheeks were hollow and he had not shaved for days. I knew
that when I had first met him he had been without scruples, a shallow youth, the product of many
circumstances. He was no longer so shallow and he had stumbled upon love, but his character was
too weak to sustain the weight of disillusionment. Perhaps I should have left him severely alone from
the beginning. Before me sat a ruin, and I had helped to undermine the foundations. None of us can
really avoid seeing the outcome of our smallest actions …
‘I’m off to Delhi, Sunil.’
He did not look up from the table.
‘Have a good time,’ he said.
‘Have you heard from Maureen?’ I asked, certain that he had not.
He nodded, but for once he did not offer to show me the letter.
‘What’s wrong?’ I asked.
‘Oh, nothing,’ he said, looking up and forcing a smile. ‘These dames are all the same, uncle. We
shouldn’t take them too seriously, you know.’
‘Why, what has she done, got married to someone else?’
‘Yes,’ he said scornfully. ‘To a bloody teacher.’
‘Well, she wasn’t young,’ I said. ‘She couldn’t wait for you for ever, I suppose.’
‘She could if she had really loved me. But there’s no such thing as love, is there, uncle?’
I made no reply. Had he really broken his heart over a woman? Were there, within him,
unsuspected depths of feeling and passion? You find love when you least expect to; and lose it, when
you are sure that it is in your grasp.
‘You’re a lucky beggar,’ he said. ‘You’re a philosopher. You find a reason for every stupid thing,
and so you are able to ignore all stupidity.’
I laughed. ‘You’re becoming a philosopher yourself. But don’t think too hard, Sunil, you might find
it painful.’
‘Not I, chachaji,’ he said, emptying his glass. ‘I’m not going to think. I’m going to work in a paper
factory. I shall become respectable. What an adventure that will be!’
And that was the last time I saw Sunil.
He did not become respectable. He was still searching like a great discoverer for something new,
someone different, when he met his pitiful end in the cold rain of a December night.
Though murder cases usually get reported in the papers, Sunil was a person of such little
importance that his violent end was not considered newsworthy. It went unnoticed, and Maureen
could not have known about it. The case has already been forgotten, for in the great human mass that
is India, hundreds of people disappear every day and are never heard of again. Sunil will be quickly
forgotten by all except those to whom he owed money